# Perlin Noise Generator & Visualiser
### Video Demo : <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3YW8uoQhANY>
### Description:
For my final project, I created the Perlin Noise algorithm in JavaScript AND created a website to visualise it in different formats. Firstly, what is Perlin Noise? It is a procedural terrain generation algorithm using maths to create seemingly random looking terrain. It is used for a variety of things such as 3D terrain generation for video games, adding colour or texture to digital models/objects and can be used to create 2D maps for any purpose. Most famously it is used by Minecraft to generate its terrain.
Perlin Noise is a useful algorithm, so I wanted to first build my own version (I followed the description of the algorithm but created the code for it on my own using no premade libraries or non-native javascript functionallity) and to build a website to visualize the output of the algorithm.
Firstly, what does my website do? At the core of the website, it has 2 different features around Perlin Noise, generating it and displaying it.
My website has 6 different parameters that you must enter into the Perlin Noise algorithm to properly calculate the terrain. My website provides number inputs through HTML allowing the user to enter in their selected values.
Next, the algorithm will check if these inputs are valid. Perlin Noise uses the different inputs in a specific way and if they do not interact properly the algorithm will break. Using JavaScript I created a validation function to make sure the inputs are correct, and if they are not which ones are invalid and why.
If the inputs are valid, multiple JavaScript functions are called that together are the Perlin Noise algorithm. Using the given inputs the algorithm will calculate and output a 2D array of floats between -1 and +1 to represent the change in height:
The algorithm firstly creates a grid of pixels and splits the pixels up into chunks. The corner of each chunk will be assigned a vector with a random rotation. Neighbouring chunks will share vectors. Then, the algorithm will loop through each pixel in each chunk. Each pixel will draw four vectors, each from the pixel’s location to each corner. Then, the algorithm will record the dot product of each vector at the corner with the vector drawn to it from the pixel. After this, we have 4 dot products that we will perform cosine interpolation on twice to end up with a single value, finally being the pixels value.
If the user selected there to be multiple octaves of Perlin Noise, the algorithm as outlined above will be repeated for each octave and overlayed onto the original map.
Once this is done and a 2D array of values exists, my website will then preform the second important part of its purpose: to visualise the output. My website allows for 3 different interpretations of the numbers, being greyscale, binary and colour.
Greyscale will colour a pixel a shade of grey depending on how large the value is, the smaller it is the darker the shade of grey it is. This is the simplest way to visualise Perlin Noise.
Next, the user can select the binary display format, which displays the pixels colour as back if it is below a set boundary and white if it is larger then said boundary. Users can also change the boundaries value.
Finally, the users can represent the map using colour. The range of all values is split up into 8 equally sized sub-ranges, each determining the colour the pixel has if it falls within said boundary. Users cannot change the number of boundaries or the size of them, but you can change the hex colour code for each boundary individually.
Finally, once all values and display format factors have been selected, you hit the button “Generate Map” which will calculate the Perlin Noise map and then display it in the selected display format. The image will then pop up into a canvas on screen, where users can look at the image, and download it by right clicking on it and selecting “Save Image As” if they wish. Finally, there is a brief description of what values do and how they should be entered into this algorithm to create a functioning and well looking output.
For this project, I used HTML to design the structure of the Website, CSS to style the website, JavaScript to handle interactions with the user as well as all of the Perlin Noise algorithm code and Input validation code as well as elements of Bootstrap to style the website better.
